rewrite ledger model structure page (#21238)
digital-asset/daml: sdk/docs/manually-written/overview/explanations/ledger-model/ledger-structure.rst

#########

.. note::
   * Unassign vs. Assign (necessary for reassignment counter?)

   

This section looks at the structure of a ledger and the associated ledger
changes. The basic building blocks of changes are *actions*, which get grouped
into *transactions*.

> 

Reviewer: I feel it'd be helpful to explain here a bit more *why* we're looking at these concepts. I'm thinking that's because they represent the "smallest unit" for our properties, for example, privacy, what a party can or cannot do, etc

Author: Good point. I've now moved the last sentence of the page to here. Is that good enough?

.. _actions:

> Actions

Reviewer: This section would benefit from some subheaders, or some definition/note blocks. Otherwise it's a bit hard to visually structure the information.

Author: Good idea. I've added subsections.

*******

One of the main features of the Ledger Model is a *hierarchical action structure*.
This structure is illustrated below using the :ref:`running example <da-ledgers-running-example>`:

> Alice and Bob have allocated their assets (contracts #1 and #2) on the ledger to a ``SimpleDvp`` contract (#4).
> Bob now exercises the ``Settle`` choice on this contract to perform the atomic exchange of the two assets.

Reviewer: An attempt to make it easier to follow on the figure. 

```suggestion
Alice and Bob have allocated their assets (contracts #1 and #2) on the ledger to a ``SimpleDvp`` contract (#4). These contracts appear as Inputs in the figure below.

Bob now exercises the ``Settle`` choice on this contract to perform the atomic exchange of the two assets.
```

Author: I've added the "these contracts appear as inputs...". The sentence with Bob is now gone given that I've moved the Script up.

#. Alice exercises the ``Transfer`` choice on her ``SimpleAsset`` contract #1, which archives the contract.
   This subaction contains another consequence, namely the creation of Bob's new ``SimpleAsset`` contract #5.
   
#. Bob exercises the ``Transfer`` choice on his ``SimpleAsset`` contract #2.
   As a consequence thereof, Alice's new ``SimpleAsset`` contract #6 is created.

The diagram below depicts this hierarchical structure of actions (in blue):
Every exercise of a choice and create of a contract yields a node in a tree with the consequences as children,
denoted by the dash-dotted arrows.
The nodes refer to input contracts shown in gray, which are not part of the action itself.

.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/f3f49c7c-d257-4136-9dcb-39750f45c24d/edit
.. image:: ./images/dvp-settle-action.svg
   :alt: The settlement action on the ``SimpleDvp`` contract between Alice and Bob, with the two legs of the swap as consequences.

Overall, the settlement in this example contains two types of actions:

#. Creating contracts

#. Exercising choices on contracts.

These are also the two main kinds of actions in the Ledger Model.

> .. _def-action:

Reviewer: This doesn't seem to format in a nice way.

Author: Can you explain a bit in what sense this is not "nice"? On my system, this looks OK for now and Pawel and the docs team may be able to improve this in the future.

Definition: **Action**
  An **action** is one of the following:

  #. A **Create** action on a template, which records the creation of the contract.
     A Create action contains the following pieces of information:

     * The **contract ID** is a unique identifier of the contract.
       It is equivalent to the transaction output (TxO) in ledger models based on `unspent transaction outputs (UTxO) <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unspent_transaction_output>`_.

     * The **template ID** identifies the Daml code associated with the contract,
       and its arguments define the **contract instance**, which is the immutable data associated with the contract ID.

     * The **signatories** are the non-empty set of parties that must authorize the creation and archival of the contract.

>      * The **contract observers**, or just observers for short, are the set of parties that will be informed about the contract creation and archival, in addition to the signatories.

Reviewer: Nite: above we used `signatories` and not `contract signatories`, so why not here too?

```suggestion
     * The **observers** are the set of parties that will be informed about the contract creation and archival, in addition to the signatories.
```

     In Daml, the signatories and contract observers are determined by the ``signatory`` and ``observer`` clauses defined by the template.
   
     Create nodes are depicted as shown below.
     Diagrams often omit fields with empty values and observers that are also signatories.

     .. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/31888b88-d836-457d-a4a8-05e3e161e07f/edit
     .. image:: ./images/create-node.svg
        :align: center
        :width: 30%
        :alt: The structure of a **Create** node.
   
  #. An **Exercise** action on a contract, which records that one or more parties have exercised a choice on the contract.
     An Exercise action contains the following pieces of information:

     * An exercise **kind**, which is either **consuming** or
       **non-consuming**. Once consumed, a contract cannot be used again;
       for example, Alice must not be able to transfer her asset twice, as this would be double spending.

>        In contrast, contracts exercised in a non-consuming fashion can be reused.

Reviewer: My intention was to give a simple example of non-consuming exercise, but you're right, fetching is not great here. I just don't know a simple example of a non-consuming exercise, maybe we could just say "read" a contract?

   :width: 100%
   :alt: The accept action on Alice's ``ProposeSimpleDvP`` exercised by Bob.

A non-consuming exercise shows up in the combined ``AcceptAndSettle`` choice on the ``ProposeSimpleDvP`` contract:
This choice is non-consuming so that the ``Accept`` choice exercised in the choice body can consume the proposal contract.
As the next diagram shows, non-consuming exercises yield multiple references to the same input contract #3.
The diagram also shows that fetches have the same effect: input contract #2 is used twice.

.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/fdcc5894-e013-499e-ba85-de16300381a8/edit
.. image:: ./images/dvp-propose-accept-and-settle-action.svg
   :align: center
   :width: 100%
   :alt: The accept-and-settle action on Alice's ``ProposeSimpleDvP`` exercised by Bob.

This example again highlights the hierarchical structure of actions:
The ``AcceptAndSettle`` action contains the corresponding actions for ``Accept`` and ``Settle`` as its consequences.

More generally, for an action `act`, its **proper subactions** are all actions in the consequences of
`act`, together with all of their proper subactions.
Additionally, `act` is a (non-proper) **subaction** of itself.

> The subaction relation is visualized below for Bob's ``Settle`` exercise by nested boxes with rounded corners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The subaction relation is visualized below for Bob's ``Settle`` exercise. The nested boxes with rounded corners represent subactions, and the boxes with straight corners represent actions .
```

Author: Good idea. Done.

   :width: 60%
   :alt: The subactions of Bob exercising the ``Settle` choice on the DvP contract.

.. _transactions:
         
Transactions
************

A **transaction** is a list of actions that are executed atomically.
Those actions are called the **root actions** of the transaction.
That is, for a transaction `tx = act`:sub:`1`\ `, …, act`:sub:`n`, every `act`:sub:`i` is a **root action**.
For example, if Alice and Charlie have made one DvP proposal each for Bob, then Bob may want to accept both simulataneously.
To that end, Bob exercises both ``Accept`` choices in a single transaction with two root actions (blue and purple), as shown next.

.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/acb71942-2a11-417c-ae0a-003c8ea2da69/edit
.. image:: ./images/dvp-accept-two.svg
   :align: center
   :width: 100%
   :alt: A transaction with two top-level actions where Bob accepts two DvP proposal, one from Alice and one from Charlie.

In particular, the consequences of an exercise form a transaction.
In the example of the ``Settle`` action on Alice's and Bob's ``SimpleDvP``,
the consequences of the ``Settle`` action form the following transaction,
where actions are ordered left-to-right as before.

> The transaction consists of two root actions (blue and purple), namely the two ``Transfer`` actions of the two legs of the DvP.

Reviewer: Here we switch to another example, but we introduce it with "In particular", which makes me think we'll look in more detail at the previous exaample. Moreover, this new example uses the same colors as the previous one, so it's confusing.

I'd suggest to either use the example above to illustrate that the consequences of an exercise form a transaction, or to make it more clear that we're moving to another example.

The data associated with each UTxO is immutable;
modifications happen by consuming a contract ID and recreating a new contract with a different contract ID.

This Ledger Model extends the UTxO model in two aspects:

* A transaction may use a contract without consuming it, for example by exercising a non-consuming choice or fetching it.
  In such a case, the contract ID remains in the set of UTxOs even though it appears as an input to a transaction.

* Transactions are structured hierarchically and contract IDs created in the transaction may be consumed within the same transaction.
  For example, inside the ``AcceptAndSettle`` action, the created ``SimpleDvP`` in the first consequence is consumed by the second consequence.
  Such contracts are called **transient**.

These aspects are discussed in more detail in the remaining sections of the Ledger Model.

Ledger
******

The transaction structure records the contents of the changes, but not *who requested them*.
This information is added by the notion of a **commit**:
a transaction paired with the parties that requested it, called the **requesters** of the commit.

> A commit has one or more requesters.

Reviewer: Can a commit have more than one transaction? I think not, but it would be worth to be explicit.

In Daml Script, the requesters correspond to the ``actAs`` parties given to the ``submit`` commands.

Definition **Ledger**:
  A **Ledger** is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of commits,
  where an edge `(c`:sub:`1`\ `, c`:sub:`2`\ `)` connects a commit `c`:sub:`1` to another commit `c`:sub:`2`
  if and only if the transaction of `c`:sub:`1` uses a contract ID created by the transaction in `c`:sub:`2`.

Definition **top-level action**:
  For a commit, the root actions of its transaction are called the **top-level actions**.
  A top-level action of any ledger commit is also a top-level action of the ledger.

> A Canton Ledger thus represents the full history of all actions taken by parties.\ [#ledger-vs-journal]_

Reviewer: The footnote is good, yet I'm not sure what point it tries to make, and it might be confusion as is.

> Calling such a complete record “ledger” is standard in the distributed ledger technology community

Agreed

> In accounting terminology, this record is closer to a journal than to a ledger.

Which accounting terminology are you referring to? Which readers would find this relevant? It's as if this second sentence weakens the fact that we have a ledger, as if we don't quite have a "proper" ledger (whatever that might mean).

If the goal was to purely inform about how different communities might call Canton's structure, then perhaps we could say:
"The x community (accounting community is probably not it) would likely call this record a journal".

Author: You're right. This footnote adds more confusion than it resolves. I've removed it.

   :language: daml
   :start-after: SNIPPET-SCRIPT-BEGIN
   :end-before: SNIPPET-SCRIPT-END

This workflow gives rise to the ledger shown below with four commits:

* In the first commit, Bank 1 requests the creation of the ``SimpleAsset`` of ``1 EUR`` issued to Alice (contract #1).
  
* In the second commit, Bank 2 requests the creation of the ``SimpleAsset`` of ``1 USD`` issued to Bob (contract #2).

* In the thrid commit, Alice requests the creation of the ``SimpleDvpPoposal`` (contract #3).

* In the forth commit, Bob requests to exercise the ``AcceptAndSettle`` choice on the DvP proposal.

.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/3ef6e9da-b534-4640-bc19-8fa5c7fb3a71/edit
.. image:: ./images/dvp-ledger.svg
   :align: center
   :alt: The sequence of commits for the whole DvP workflow. First, banks 1 and 2 issue the assets, then Alice proposes the DvP, and finally Bob accepts and settles it.

.. note::
   The Ledger does not impose an order between independent commits.
   In this example, there are no edges among the first three commits,
   so they could be presented in any order.

   As the Ledger is a DAG, one can always extend the order into a linear sequence via a topological sort.

>    For the next sections, we pretend that the Ledger is totally ordered, and discuss the more general partial orders in the causality section.

Reviewer: This sentence contradicts itself a bit, because the next sections except the causality section assume the ledger to be totally ordered. How about rephrasing it to: 
```
For the next sections, we pretend that the Ledger is totally ordered (unless otherwise specified). We discuss the more general partial order in the causality section.
```

Author: This sounds much better!

.. todo::
   Link to causality section

The definitions presented here are all the ingredients required to *record* the interaction between parties in a Daml ledger.

> That is, they address the first question: "what do changes and ledgers look like?".

Reviewer: This is nice! Some flavor of the goal of this section should make its way in the introduction.

Author: Yep. Moved it up and deleted it here.

   

This section looks at the structure of a ledger and the associated ledger
changes. The basic building blocks of changes are *actions*, which get grouped
into *transactions*.

.. _actions:

Actions
*******

One of the main features of the Ledger Model is a *hierarchical action structure*.
This structure is illustrated below using the :ref:`running example <da-ledgers-running-example>`:
Alice and Bob have allocated their assets (contracts #1 and #2) on the ledger to a ``SimpleDvp`` contract (#4).
Bob now exercises the ``Settle`` choice on this contract to perform the atomic exchange of the two assets.

Exercising ``Settle`` choice yields an Exercise action that references the ``SimpleDvp`` input contract #4.

> This action has two consequences, which perform the asset transfers:

Reviewer: I'd like to avoid people thinking that Alice and Bob need to do something additional to "enable" the consequences. Thus I'm thinking to somehow say that the action's body contains two consequences, which were authorized by alice and bob when they created the SimpleDvP, and which execute automatically as part of the action (or something like that).

Reviewer: 👍

#. Alice exercises the ``Transfer`` choice on her ``SimpleAsset`` contract #1.

>    This subaction has another consequence, namely the creation of Bob's new ``SimpleAsset`` contract #5.

Author: Good idea. Done.

   
#. Bob exercises the ``Transfer`` choice on his ``SimpleAsset`` contract #2.
   As a consequence thereof, Alice's new ``SimpleAsset`` contract #6 is created.

The diagram below depicts this hierarchical structure of actions (in blue):
Every exercise of a choice and create of a contract yields a node in a tree with the consequences as children,
denoted by the dash-dotted arrows.

> The nodes refer to inputs shown in gray, which are not part of the action itself.

Reviewer: Maybe more concrete:
```suggestion
The nodes refer to input contracts shown in gray, which are not part of the action itself.
```

.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/f3f49c7c-d257-4136-9dcb-39750f45c24d/edit
.. image:: ./images/dvp-settle-action.svg
   :alt: The settlement action on the ``SimpleDvp`` contract between Alice and Bob, with the two legs of the swap as consequences.

> Overall, the settlement in this example is reduced to two types of actions:

Reviewer: I'm not a fan of "reduced"
```suggestion
Overall, the settlement in this example embeds/contains to two types of actions:
```

#. Creating contracts

#. Exercising choices on contracts.

These are also the two main kinds of actions in the Ledger Model.

.. _def-action:

Definition: **Action**
  An **action** is one of the following:

>   #. A **Create** action on a contract, which records the creation of the contract.

Reviewer: Might be too verbose of a suggestion
```suggestion
  #. A **Create** action on a contract definition, which records the creation of the contract instance.
```

     A Create action contains the following pieces of information:

     * The **contract ID** is a unique identifier of the contract.

>        It is equivalent to the transaction output TxO in UTxO models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       It is equivalent to the transaction output TxO in UTxO (unspent transaction output) ledger models (e.g., Bitcoin, Cardano).
```

Reviewer: Maybe the examples would be too much though

Author: Good idea to spell out UTxO. I'll leave out the examples and rather link to the wikipedia article on UTxOs.

Reviewer: 👍

     * The **template ID** identifies the Daml code associated with the contract,

>        and its argument define the **contract instance**, which is the immutable data associated with the contract ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       and its arguments define the **contract instance**, which is the immutable data associated with the contract ID.
```

     * The **signatories** are the non-empty set of parties that must authorize the creation and archival of the contract.

     * The **contract observers**, or just observers for short, are the set of parties that will be informed about the contract creation and archival, in addition to the signatories.

>      The signatories and contract observers can be computed from the template arguments using the ``signatory`` and ``observer`` clauses defined by the template.

Author: Well, it simply means that we would not have to mention the signatories and observers explicitly in the create node as they are already determined by the other pieces of information. In DB terms, this leads to a denormalized representation. I still want to keep them explicitly in Create nodes because it will be very convenient for discussing 
projections and authorization and also essential when I'll discuss SCU.

I've rephrased the sentence. It's not really relevant that something can be computed here.

     Exercise nodes are depicted as shown below, where the consequences are indicated by arrows ordered left-to-right.
     Diagrams omit the kind if it is consuming, empty field values, and choice observers that are also actors.

     .. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/ce3c7eb2-081e-4ac4-af92-5efc11d21c17/edit
     .. image:: ./images/exercise-node.svg
        :align: center
        :width: 30%
        :alt: The structure of an **Exercise** node.

  #. A **Fetch** action on a contract, which demonstrates that the contract exists and is active at the time of
     fetching.
     A Fetch behaves like a non-consuming exercise with no consequences, and can be repeated.
     The action contains the following pieces of information, analogous to Exercise nodes: **contract ID**, **interface ID**, **template ID**, and the **actors**, namely the parties who fetch the contract.

     Fetch actions are depicted as shown below.

     .. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/27844d5e-0cdb-4f22-8f67-e97f3839e613/edit
     .. image:: ./images/fetch-node.svg
        :align: center
        :width: 30%
        :alt: The structure of a **Fetch** node.

> An **Exercise** or a **Fetch** action on a contract is said to **use** the contract.

Reviewer: I think this is what you meant?
```suggestion
A non-consuming **Exercise** or a **Fetch** action on a contract is said to **use** the contract.
```

Author: No. "use" is meant to cover consuming and non-consuming exercises.

Author: > Could we simply say that all actions "use" contracts? And then "Additionally, consuming exercises [...]"

Well, Create actions are also actions and they don't use contracts.

> Moreover, a consuming **Exercise** is said to **consume** (or **archive**) its contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, a consuming **Exercise** is said to **consume** (or **archive**) its contract.
```

Author: Since "use" and "consume" are not disjoint, I'll stick with "moreover".

Reviewer: Please see https://github.com/digital-asset/daml/pull/21238#discussion_r2108588445

A non-consuming exercise shows up in the combined ``AcceptAndSettle`` choice on the ``ProposeSimpleDvP`` contract:
This choice is non-consuming so that the ``Accept`` choice exercised in the choice body can consume the proposal contract.
As the next diagram shows, non-consuming exercises yield multiple references to the same input contract #3.
The diagram also shows that fetches have the same effect: input contract #2 is used twice.

.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/fdcc5894-e013-499e-ba85-de16300381a8/edit
.. image:: ./images/dvp-propose-accept-and-settle-action.svg
   :align: center
   :width: 100%
   :alt: The accept-and-settle action on Alice's ``ProposeSimpleDvP`` exercised by Bob.

This example again highlights the hierarchical structure of actions:
The ``AcceptAndSettle`` action contains the corresponding actions for ``Accept`` and ``Settle`` as its consequences.

More generally, for an action `act`, its **proper subactions** are all actions in the consequences of
`act`, together with all of their proper subactions.
Additionally, `act` is a (non-proper) **subaction** of itself.

The subaction relation is visualized below for Bob's ``Settle`` exercise.

> Both the blue and purple boxes are proper subactions of Bob's ``Settle`` action (shown as the grey box).

Author: I see what you mean. The inner blue box is just the node, not the action. I'm referring here to the outer boxes. Unfortunately, I can't draw boxes with double lines in Lucid. So I've now switches to rounded corners for disambiguation. Is that better?

> Both the blue and purple boxes are proper subactions of Bob's ``Settle`` action (shown as the grey box).

Reviewer: Rounded corners definitely looks better, especially if the text says what rounded corners mean. However, I think double lines would be even better, because visually it's immediately clear. Double lines can be "simulated" with two overlapping rectangles. Would be nice to have IMHO, but I don't want to insist if you think otherwise :)

> Both the blue and purple boxes are proper subactions of Bob's ``Settle`` action (shown as the grey box).

Author: Overlapping rectangles sound like difficult to maintain w.r.t. consistent line spacing. I'll stick with rounded corners. If the design team has a better idea, they can redesign this stuff.

The green box is a proper subaction of the blue and the grey boxes, and the yellow box is a proper subaction of the purple and the grey boxes.

.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/dbe05602-46b8-4b23-8957-a8e15af912e6/edit
.. image:: ./images/dvp-settle-subactions.svg
   :align: center
   :width: 60%
   :alt: The subactions of Bob exercising the ``Settle` choice on the DvP contract.

.. _transactions:
         
Transactions
************

A **transaction** is a list of actions.
Thus, the consequences of an exercise form a transaction.
In the example, the consequences of the ``Settle`` action form the following transaction,
where actions are ordered left-to-right as before.
The transaction consists of two actions, namely the two ``Transfer`` actions of the two legs of the DvP.

.. https://lucid.app/lucidchart/b8f2c6d1-654b-4658-adc5-77eb59e27d05/edit
.. image:: ./images/dvp-settle-consequences-are-transactions.svg
   :align: center
   :width: 50%
   :alt: The consequences of the ``Settle`` action are a transaction of two actions, namely the two ``Transfer`` legs of the DvP.

The hierarchical structure of actions extends to transactions and yields the notion of subtransactions.

> A **proper subtransaction** of a transaction is obtained by removing at least one action, or replacing it by a subtransaction of its consequences;

Reviewer: Is "or" correct here?

Author: The whole definition in unnecessary complicated. I've simplified it. There's no "or" now.
